---
layout: post
title:
  Auburn Basketball Offensive and Defensive Efficiencies in the Bruce Pearl Era
  - With Graphs!
author: Jacob Varner
tags: [Auburn, Stats]
time_to_read: 9 minutes
---

One of the most essential "advanced metrics" that I (and a lot of people) use to
judge teams is offensive and defensive efficiency. It's a common metric for
comparing NBA teams and is also useful in college basketball, although, as with
a lot of things, the majorly unbalanced schedules in college cause there to be
some caveats.

I don't have near the amount of data as [Ken Pomeroy](https://www.kenpomery.com)
or other bigger sites, so my offensive and defensive efficiencies (also called
ratings) don't factor in opponents, so they're NOT adjusted efficiencies. This
is not as big a deal when just looking at one team, but I'll try to note when
games are against either very good or very bad teams in order to put some of the
more impressive wins into perspective.

### Explaining Efficiencies and Possessions

Before I get too far into this, I want to give a basic explanation of offensive
and defensive efficiency. In the most basic sense, each efficiency is just the
number of points that the Auburn (for offensive efficiency) or their opponent
(for defensive efficiency) scored if the game had had 100 possessions. This
normalizes the ratings for teams or games that are faster or slower tempo.

As an example, a team that scores 90 points but has 80 possessions in a game
isn't as impressive as a team that scores 80 points with just 65 possessions in
a game.

I plan on doing another post in the future going into the details of how I
calculate possessions and other common metrics in my spreadsheet, but for now,
possessions are just calculated using shots, rebounds, and turnovers for both
teams, and then averaged out. This isn't always exactly accurate because it's
just based on the box score, but it allows me to calculate possessions for games
all the time even if actual possessions were not tracked.

### Overview of my Graphs Used in this Post

Each of the graphs I use in this post all show the offensive efficiency,
defensive efficiency, and net efficiency (offense minus defense) for each game
of the season. I've also plotted a line that is a running average of the
offensive and defensive efficiencies as the season progresses. With this, a game
with a higher offensive efficiency than defensive efficiency is a win for Auburn
and any games for both metrics above the average are "good" games at that point
in the season.

The offensive efficiencies are in green while the defensive efficiencies are in
red. The yellow line at the bottom is the net efficiency which shows whether
Auburn won or loss if it is positive or negative, as well as the margin of
victory or margin of defeat in a tempo free way.

_Since this is my first time using graphs with my stats, I'm definitely open to
feedback on things that can be better conveyed. Feel free to let me know
[on Twitter](https://www.twitter.com/jacobvarner)._

{% include ad-content.html %}

#### 2019-2020 Season

**Record:** 20-2 (through 22 games)

**Average Opponent KenPom Ranking:** 98.18

**Top 25 KenPom Opponents:** 0

**Top 50 KenPom Opponents:** 5

**Top 100 KenPom Opponents:** 13

![Auburn Basketball Efficiency for the 2019-2020 Season][image6]

I've mentioned several times on Twitter that the Alabama and Florida games this
season were major outliers. In fact, they were two of the worst offensive games
Auburn has played individually in the Bruce Pearl era and were the worst
back-to-back games during his tenure. As a result, the net efficiency also takes
a big dip in those games.

Another game of note is the win over Cal State Northridge where Auburn had the
second best offensive efficiency in the Bruce Pearl era with 141.7 points per
100 possessions as well as the fifth best net efficiency at 56.2.

While this is the first season since 2015-2016 that the offensive efficiency for
the season hasn't improved on the previous year, the current season average for
defensive efficiency is the best in the Bruce Pearl era by almost 5 points at
95.9 points per 100 possessions.

Currently, Auburn doesn't have the best strength of schedule based on average
KenPom ranking for opponents, but that should improve as Auburn continues to
face above average teams in conference play and hopefully has a longer post
season similar to last season.

#### 2018-2019 Season

**Record:** 30-10

**Average Opponent KenPom Ranking:** 69.44

**Top 25 KenPom Opponents:** 12

**Top 50 KenPom Opponents:** 19

**Top 100 KenPom Opponents:** 31

![Auburn Basketball Efficiency for the 2018-2019 Season][image5]

The 2018-2019 season was much more up or down, especially at the beginning of
the season, and that can be seen by the very jagged lines for both offensive and
defensive efficiency. However, the team clearly got hot at the perfect time
three games with over a 20 net efficiency in the SEC and NCAA Tournaments
against Tennessee, Kansas, and North Carolina.

While the opponents certainly weren't the toughest challenges, Auburn posted
their two best defensive performances back to back against Saint Peter's and UNC
Asheville with defensive efficiencies of 64.5 and 62.0 respectively. The Saint
Peter's game was the best net efficiency performance in the Bruce Pearl era
(albeit against a team ranked 235th in KenPom at the time) and the UNC Asheville
game was the best defensive efficiency performance in the Bruce Pearl era.

The 140.7 offensive efficiency in the first game of the season against South
Alabama is the second best offensive performance in the Bruce Pearl era (against
a team ranked 174 in KenPom at the time).

Overall, the 2018-2019 team posted the best offensive efficiency for a season in
the Bruce Pearl era and the best defensive efficiency for a season up until this
season. All of this was against the best overall set of opponents that Auburn
has faced under Bruce Pearl thanks to an invite the Maui Invitational and then a
run all the way through the SEC Tournament followed by a Final Four appearance.

{% include ad-content.html %}

# 2017-2018 Season

**Record:** 26-8

**Average Opponent KenPom Ranking:** 94.41

**Top 25 KenPom Opponents:** 4

**Top 50 KenPom Opponents:** 9

**Top 100 KenPom Opponents:** 22

![Auburn Basketball Efficiency for the 2017-2018 Season][image4]

The 2017-2018 team was off to a similar start to the 2019-2020 team but then you
can clearly see where Anfernee McLemore went down with a season ending injury in
the 27th game against South Carolina.

Auburn's best offensive game of the season came in game five against Winthrop
where Auburn scored 145.3 points per 100 possessions. That game is also the best
offensive game in the Bruce Pearl era.

Auburn posted its two best defensive performances in the second game of the
season against Indiana State (79.5 points per 100 possessions), and the second
to last game of the season against College of Charleston (79.1 points per 100
possessions). The College of Charleston game came at a perfect time which saved
Auburn's poor offense of just 84.6 points per 100 possessions and allowed Auburn
to remain undefeated in opening round NCAA Tournament games.

#### 2016-2017 Season

**Record:** 18-14

**Average Opponent KenPom Ranking:** 105.09

**Top 25 KenPom Opponents:** 3

**Top 50 KenPom Opponents:** 8

**Top 100 KenPom Opponents:** 20

![Auburn Basketball Efficiency for the 2016-2017 Season][image3]

The 2016-2017 season was the first winning season under Bruce Pearl and the
first winning season for Auburn since the 2008-2009 season under Jeff Lebo.
Auburn may have had a winning record, but it was against Bruce Pearl's worst set
of opponents based on KenPom average ranking and was up and down almost the
entire way.

Auburn's biggest win of the year came against Coastal Carolina and former coach
Cliff Ellis where Auburn posted a 137.0 offensive efficiency, 84.3 defensive
efficiency, and 52.7 net efficiency.

The Florida game at home in the 26th game of the season was the second worst
defensive performance of the Bruce Pearl era where Auburn gave up a miserable
140.7 points per 100 possessions.

{% include ad-content.html %}

#### 2015-2016 Season

**Record:** 11-20

**Average Opponent KenPom Ranking:** 88.97

**Top 25 KenPom Opponents:** 4

**Top 50 KenPom Opponents:** 7

**Top 100 KenPom Opponents:** 22

![Auburn Basketball Efficiency for the 2015-2016 Season][image2]

In 2015-2016, Auburn had probably the hardest regular season in the Bruce Pearl
era with an average KenPom ranking of opponents of 88.97 without playing more
than one postseason game. While the schedule didn't present a lot of easy games,
Auburn still finished with the worst record under Bruce Pearl and worst season
record since Tony Barbee's team in 2012-2013.

Despite a lot of bad performances on both ends of the court, Auburn still posted
the third best offensive performance under Bruce Pearl with 140.6 points per 100
possession against Northwestern State in the fourth game of the season. The game
was the best offensive performance of the year and was 25.2 points per 100
possessions better than every other game the rest of the season.

The very last game of the season was the worst defensively where Auburn gave up
141.0 points per 100 possessions against Tennessee in the first round of the SEC
Tournament. The game was also the worst defensive performance by Auburn in the
Bruce Pearl era.

#### 2014-2015 Season

**Record:** 15-20

**Average Opponent KenPom Ranking:** 88.79

**Top 25 KenPom Opponents:** 4

**Top 50 KenPom Opponents:** 15

**Top 100 KenPom Opponents:** 21

![Auburn Basketball Efficiency for the 2014-2015 Season][image1]

If you look at the averages for offensive and defensive efficiency as the year
went on, it's pretty clear the the 2014-2015 was pretty even on both ends of the
court but couldn't put both sides together very often (until the end of the
year).

Right before the end of the regular season, Auburn posted four straight games
with offensive efficiencies below 100. It looked like it was going to be a rough
ending for Bruce Pearl's first season at Auburn.

However, the Tigers actually turned up the defense in the SEC Tournament with
three games at 95.2, 84.0, and 95.0 points allowed per 100 possessions on the
way to wins over Mississippi State, Texas A&M, and LSU. Those would be the first
wins in the SEC Tournament for Auburn since the 2008-2009 season under Jeff
Lebo.

Auburn ran out of gas and met the then undefeated Kentucky Wildcats and their
net efficiency took a nose dive to end the season in the SEC Tournament Semifinal.

{% include ad-content.html %}

Again, I think offensive and defensive efficiency are two of the best stats for
judging teams on a level playing field without overhyping defenses that play
slow or offenses that play fast. I hope the metrics make sense and help paint an
overall picture for both sides of the ball under Bruce Pearl at Auburn.

As always, if you have any questions about specific data points or explanations
in this post, please don't hesitate to reach out to me
[on Twitter](https://www.twitter.com/jacobvarner). Thanks for taking the time to
read my overview of Auburn basketball offensive and defensive efficiencies under
Bruce Pearl and I hope the graphs made it more interesting.

War Eagle!

[image1]: /images/2020-2-7/Auburn Basketball Efficiency for the 2014-2015 Season.png
[image2]: /images/2020-2-7/Auburn Basketball Efficiency for the 2015-2016 Season.png
[image3]: /images/2020-2-7/Auburn Basketball Efficiency for the 2016-2017 Season.png
[image4]: /images/2020-2-7/Auburn Basketball Efficiency for the 2017-2018 Season.png
[image5]: /images/2020-2-7/Auburn Basketball Efficiency for the 2018-2019 Season.png
[image6]: /images/2020-2-7/Auburn Basketball Efficiency for the 2019-2020 Season.png
